Integrating Natural Language Processing and Exercise Monitoring 
for Early Diagnosis of Metabolic Syndrome: A Deep Learning 
Approach 
Yichen Zhao, Yuhua Wang, Xi Cheng, Junhao Fang and Yang Yang  
ABSTRACT 
Metabolic 
syndrome 
(MetS) 
is 
a 
medication 
condition 
characterized 
by 
abdominal 
obesity, 
insulin 
resistance, 
hypertension and hyperlipidemia. It increases the risk of majority 
of chronic diseases, including type 2 diabetes mellitus, and affects 
about one quarter of the global population. Therefore, early 
detection and timely intervention for MetS are crucial. Standard 
diagnosis for MetS components requires blood tests conducted 
within 
medical 
institutions. 
However, 
it 
is 
frequently 
underestimated, leading to unmet need for care for MetS population. 
This study aims to use the least physiological data and free texts 
about exercises related activities, which are obtained easily in daily 
life, to diagnosis MetS. We collected the data from 40 volunteers 
in a nursing home and used data augmentation to reduce the 
imbalance. We propose a deep learning framework for classifying 
MetS that integrates natural language processing (NLP) and 
exercise monitoring. The results showed that the best model 
reported a high positive result (AUROC=0.806 and REC=76.3%) 
through 3-fold cross-validation. Feature importance analysis 
revealed that text and minimum heart rate on a daily basis 
contribute the most in the classification of MetS. This study 
demonstrates the potential application of data that are easily 
measurable in daily life for the early diagnosis of MetS, which 
could contribute to reducing the cost of screening and management 
for MetS population. 
CCS CONCEPTS 
•Computing methodologies • Machine learning • Machine learning 
approaches • Neural networks 
KEYWORDS 
Metabolic Syndrome (MetS), Natural Language Processing (NLP), 
Early Diagnosis, Feature Importance Analysis 
1 Introduction 
Metabolic 
syndrome 
(MetS) 
is 
a 
medication 
condition 
characterized by abdominal obesity, hypertension, dyslipidemia, 
and elevated fasting glucose levels[1]. It has been proven to 
increase the risk of various diseases, such as type 2 diabetes 
mellitus, cardiovascular diseases, chronic kidney disease, cancer, 
and also affects patients' physical mobility. Over the past 2 decades, 
the number of individuals with MetS worldwide has surged 
dramatically, becoming a serious public health issue[2]. A meta-
analysis of epidemiological studies on MetS showed that the 
prevalence of MetS in China is 21.90%[3]. Early warning of the 
risk of MetS and timely intervention and prevention are extremely 
important. 
Currently, there are certain difficulties in the popularization of early 
diagnosis and intervention for MetS. Firstly, MetS-related 
indicators 
such 
as 
triglycerides, 
high-density 
lipoprotein 
cholesterol, and fasting blood glucose generally require blood tests 
conducted within professional medical institutions. At the same 
time, the confirmation of MetS requires metabolic experts in the 
medical structure, and the missed diagnosis rate is relatively high 
among outpatients in other specialty departments. Secondly, there 
is still a lack of effective clinical management measures for MetS 
patients, especially those who also suffer from other diseases. 
Lifestyle is the main intervention for MetS. Most MetS patients 
exhibit a decline in physical mobility, which involves complex 
pathogenesis such as insulin resistance, endothelial dysfunction, 
oxidative stress, inflammation, and changes in lipid metabolism[4]. 
Studies have found that even after correcting factors such as BMI, 
the upper limit of exercise in men with MetS is significantly lower 
than that in men without MetS, and among patients with MetS, the 
proportion with exercise habits is relatively small[5]. On the other 
hand, exercise can effectively regulate the negative impact brought 
by MetS. Studies have pointed out that individuals with MetS have 
seen significant improvements in their condition after engaging in 
more daily physical activities[6], and planned exercise (including 
walking and other daily activities) can also benefit MetS patients 
with risk factors[7]. Therefore, efficiently monitoring and precise 
assessment of daily exercise would address the unmet needs for 
care of MetS population. Specifically, monitoring daily exercise 
can be used to assess the risk of individuals developing MetS. 
Meanwhile, precise assessment the association between daily 
exercise and MetS can support and improve self-management for 
MetS population. 
Wearable devices, through tracking a variety of health-related 
variables, are one of the main ways to monitor and assess exercise 
[8]. However, due to the large differences in acceptance of 
wearable devices among different populations, poor compliance, 
difficulties in long-term wearing of wearable devices, limited types 
of measured data (often estimating other data based on a small 
amount of measured data), unsatisfied data quality, difficulties in 
data fusion from multiple devices, and inaccurate data monitoring 
during exercise[9], it is not enough to assist in the diagnosis of 
MetS by analyzing data provided solely by wearable devices. 
WOODSTOCK’18, June, 2018, El Paso, Texas USA 
F. Surname et al. 
 
 
 
Therefore, we introduced Natural Language Processing (NLP), 
which has proven to be powerful in semantic understanding and 
medical information summarization capabilities[10]. We first 
extracted relevant exercise textual information from individuals at 
risk of MetS regarding their own exercise descriptions, and then 
integrated the least physiological data about exercise using 
wearable devices, to learn latent exercise habits and effects, with 
the expectation of assisting in the diagnosis of MetS. 
To our knowledge, this is the first study to integrate NLP and 
physiology measurements to learn latent exercise capacity and 
habits, thereby assisting in the early diagnosis of MetS. We have 
validated this hypothesis by collecting a dataset and establishing a 
model, which has yielded significant results. It not only provides a 
valuable supplement to existing models for predicting and 
managing the risk of MetS, but also holds the potential to be 
integrated into online tools, promoting the widespread adoption of 
disease screening and health awareness, and serving a larger group 
of high-risk population. 
2   Method 
2.1 Data Collection and Preprocessing 
We recruited 40 volunteers from a nursing home, and collected 
their most recent physical examination data. According to the 
diagnostic criteria for MetS recommended by the Diabetes Society 
of the Chinese Medical Association[11], individuals with 
overweight and/or obesity (BMI≥25.0 kg/m²), high blood sugar 
(FPG≥6.1 mmol/L (110 mg/dl) and/or 2hPG≥7.8 mmol/L (140 
mg/dl)), and/or diagnosed and treated diabetes, hypertension 
(SBP/DBP ≥140/90 mmHg), and/or diagnosed and treated 
hypertension, and dyslipidemia (fasting blood TG≥1.7 mmol/L 
(110 mg/dl) and/or fasting blood HDL-C < 0.9 mmol/L (35 mg/dl) 
for males, < 1.0 mmol/L (39 mg/dl) for females) were selected. 
Samples meeting 3 or more of the 4 criteria were divided into 2 
groups: those with MetS and those without. After grouping, 8 
individuals were classified as having MetS, and 32 as not having 
MetS. 
Data collection was conducted on a daily basis, including four 
physiological characteristics (daily minimum heart rate, daily 
maximum heart rate, daily average oxygen saturation, daily step 
count) and one textual feature (subjective text on exercise 
experience). In line with the research objectives of this project, the 
physiological characteristics selected were easily accessible 
indicators, all of which were measured using the Huawei Band 8 
(https://consumer.huawei.com/cn/wearables/band8/). During the 
pre-experimental phase, a questionnaire was used to guide the 
volunteers to familiarize themselves with the key points of 
language expression and to help extract critical information. The 
questions included the type and duration of exercise or household 
chores performed by the volunteers that day, their physical 
sensations during the process (such as shortness of breath, slight 
sweating, severe panting, chest tightness, or hypoglycemia), and 
the impact of weather and other factors on the activity. 
Subsequently, in the formal experiment, the provided text content 
mainly includes the following aspects: the type and duration of 
exercise or household chores, physical sensations, and influencing 
factors. To ensure the quality of the data, we provided a relevant 
text template that includes the above content. At the same time, 
based on the feedback from volunteers and the principle of minimal 
interference with daily life, we allowed volunteers to elaborate and 
supplement based on the actual text framework. We conducted two 
phases of data collection for the aforementioned group, with each 
phase lasting 14 days. Considering the imbalance of the sample, an 
additional phase of data collection lasting 10 days was conducted 
for the group with MetS to increase the volume of data. The data 
collection process is shown in Appendix 1. 
Subsequently, the collected physiological data and textual data 
were subjected to data cleaning, including the exclusion or 
imputation of missing and outlier values. For data missing 
subjective exercise experience text, deletion was performed due to 
the inability to reasonably impute; for missing physiological data, 
the average value of that volunteer's data for the item was used as 
a substitute; for outlier data, such as erroneous physiological data 
caused by incorrect use of the smart bracelet by the volunteer, 
manual correction or deletion was carried out depending on 
whether the correct value could be found; for individual volunteer 
data of poor quality, such as excessive missing data or poor voice 
text quality, all data for that volunteer were deleted as a whole (2 
non-MetS volunteers' data were completely removed for this 
reason). After preprocessing, the group with MetS included 8 
individuals with 290 sets of data, and the group without MetS 
included 30 individuals with 649 sets of data. 
2.2 Model Architecture 
Based on the physiological data as well as the exercise-related 
textual data, we have proposed a classification framework for MetS, 
as shown in Figure 1.  
 
Figure 1: Text-physiological modality fusion for MetS 
classification framework. The framework is divided into three 
parts. The Text Encoder transforms textual information into 
Sequence Embedding. The Physiology Data Encoder section 
processes raw physiological data through feature engineering 
to become model inputs. The Downstream Classification Task 
section trains the classification model with the fused inputs 
obtained by the text and physiology data encoder. 
Initially, based on different fusion strategies, we proposed 3 types 
of model architectures, as depicted in Figure 2. We evaluated the 
performance of each model architecture by the optimal Area Under 
the Receiver Operating Characteristic Curve (AUROC) after 
convergence. Subsequently, we conducted a grid search for the 
optimal combination of hyperparameters involved in the models,  
Integrating Natural Language Processing and Exercise Monitoring 
for Early Diagnosis of Metabolic Syndrome: A Deep Learning 
Approach 
WOODSTOCK’18, June, 2018, El Paso, Texas USA 
 
 
 
 
(a)                                                                       (b) 
 
 
                                           (c) 
Figure 2: Three model architectures. (a) THSCL Model: daily text, daily heart rate and daily step count are concatenated 
simultaneously; (b) TS_HCL Model: daily text and daily step count are concatenated first, followed by daily heart rate; (c) TH_SCL 
Model: daily text and daily heart rate are concatenated first, followed by daily step count. For three architectures above, contrastive 
loss is added. 
which include the neuron sizes of the 2 hidden layers termed 
Reduced Dimension and Hidden Layer Dimension, as well as the 
probability p of dropout. During the hyperparameter search process, 
we assessed model performance based on the maximum AUROC 
value after model convergence. By comparing the performance on 
the validation set, we determined that the optimal settings were a 
Reduced Dimension of 3, a Hidden Layer Dimension of 32, and a 
dropout probability p of 0.3, which yielded the best results on the 
validation set. 
Additionally, we designed a Baseline Model to assess the 
advantages of the proposed model architecture. In the Baseline 
Model, the output of the BERT-styled Transformer is directly 
concatenated with the physiological data and then passed through a 
Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) for binary classification. In Baseline 
Model, contrastive loss is not introduced. In this model, dropout is 
utilized in the hidden layers to mitigate overfitting as much as 
possible, with a learning rate set to 10ିସ and the optimizer 
configured as AdamW. 
2.3 Data Augmentation and Model Training 
Initially, to eliminate redundant information that may affect 
decision-making, we conducted feature selection on the 
preprocessed data. We randomly sampled from the original 
physiological data of both the MetS group and the non-MetS group, 
and excluded features that did not exhibit significant differences 
between the 2 groups through significance testing. Subsequently, 
we performed data augmentation. For MetS group, we enhanced 
the higher-quality texts by manually removing irrelevant 
information to generate new textual data. Additionally, we 
augmented the exercise texts from all individuals in the MetS group 
by translating them into another language and then back into 
Chinese, thereby increasing the diversity of the data. The purpose 
of data augmentation was to enhance the diversity of the MetS data 
and to balance the data volume with the non-MetS group. After 
augmentation, the MetS group retained 656 sets of data. Thereafter, 
all physiological data were normalized to serve as inputs for the 
model. 
Following data augmentation, the dataset was divided. First, the 
dataset was partitioned into training and validation sets to adjust the 
model architecture and hyperparameters. To ensure a balanced 
representation of individuals with and without MetS in both the 
training and validation sets, we randomly selected data from 2 
individuals in the MetS group and, based on the quantity of data 
from the selected individuals, randomly sampled a similar amount 
of data from the non-MetS group for the validation set, with the 
remaining data used for training. Each volunteer's data from the 38 
individuals was included in either the training set or the validation 
set, ensuring the independence of the 2 sets. Secondly, to 
comprehensively assess the optimal model performance and 
prevent the poor selection of training and testing sets from failing 
to reflect the performance of the best model, we randomly selected 
25% of the data as an independent test set and evenly divided the 
remaining 75% of the data into 3 folds for 3-fold cross-validation. 
In each evaluation, we chose two folds as the training set and one 
fold as the validation set, selected the optimal model on the 
validation set and then assessed the model's generalizability on the 
test set. 
The model was trained using a combined loss function of cross-
entropy loss and contrastive loss. 
ܮ=  ߙ·ܮ஼ா+ (1 −ߙ) ·ܮ஼ைே
(1) 
ܮ஼ா= −(ݕ݈݋݃(ݕො) + (1 −ݕ) ݈݋݃(1 −ݕො))
(2) 
WOODSTOCK’18, June, 2018, El Paso, Texas USA 
F. Surname et al. 
 
 
 
ܮ஼ைே= ൣݕ௜=ݕ௝൧||ߠ(ݔ௜) −ߠ(ݔ௝)||ଶ
ଶ+ ൣݕ௜≠ݕ௝൧max (0,ߝ
−||ߠ(ݔ௜) −ߠ(ݔ௝)||ଶ
ଶ) 
(3) 
In the model training, we introduce a combined loss function where 
ߙ is set to 0.7 to balance 2 loss values to an approximately equal 
value and ߝ is set to 0.5. ݕ represents the true classification labels, 
and ݕො denotes the predicted probability distribution after softmax 
processing. ݔ௜ is the input, and ߠ(ݔ௜) is the result of the sample ݔ௜ 
processed by the model with parameters ߠ. We incorporate 
contrastive learning into the model training to enable the model to 
discern the subtle differences between MetS positive and negative 
samples, thereby enhancing the model's classification performance. 
2.4 Model Evaluation 
Considering the practical requirements of medical classification 
models, we assess the performance of the model using accuracy, 
recall, precision, F1 Score, and AUROC (Area Under the Receiver 
Operating Characteristic Curve). 
ܥܥܣ= 
ܶܲ+ ܶܰ
ܶܲ+ ܶܰ+ܲܨ+ܰܨ(4) 
ܴܥܧ= 
ܶܲ
ܶܲ+ܰܨ(5) 
ܴܲܧ= 
ܶܲ
ܶܲ+ܲܨ(6) 
ܨ1 ܵܿ݋݁ݎ= 2 × ܴܲܧ× ܴܥܧ
ܴܲܧ+ ܴܥܧ(7) 
In the context of medical classification models, we evaluate the 
model's performance using true positives (TP), which represent the 
number of correctly classified individuals with MetS; true 
negatives (TN), representing the number of correctly classified 
individuals without MetS; false positives (FP), which are the 
number of individuals without MetS incorrectly predicted as having 
it; and false negatives (FN), the number of individuals with MetS 
incorrectly predicted as not having it. 
At the same time, we consider the impact of the imbalance between 
positive (MetS) and negative (non-MetS) samples on the model's 
performance. Since the prevalence of the vast majority of diseases 
in the population is a relatively low proportion, this is a problem 
that all current disease prediction model designs have to face. We 
control the degree of data augmentation to achieve different ratios 
of MetS and non-MetS samples, and compare the performance of 
the models trained by them, thereby reflecting the relationship 
between the model's predictive performance and the degree of 
imbalance to some extent. 
2.5 Feature Importance Analysis 
To enhance the interpretability of the model and identify features 
associated with MetS, we employ the Permutation Feature 
Importance (PFI) algorithm[11] to quantify the importance of each 
feature. The process involves four main steps:  
1. 
Input the original test data into the model to obtain the initial 
performance assessment;  
2. 
For each feature, randomly shuffle the feature vector within 
the input data to create modified test data;  
3. 
Input the modified test data into the model to obtain a new 
performance assessment, and define the importance of the 
feature using the following formula. 
ܲ= ܲ௥−1
݇෍
ܲ௜
௞
௜ୀଵ
(8) 
ܲ௥ represents the performance assessment of the model when 
the original test data is inputted, and ܲ௜ represents the 
performance assessment of the model after the ݅th permutation 
of the feature. ݇ denotes the number of times the feature is 
randomly permuted, which we set to 50.  
4. 
Execute the above steps for each feature; the higher the ܲ 
value, the greater the importance of the feature. To 
comprehensively 
evaluate 
the 
model's 
classification 
performance, we adopt the AUROC as the performance 
assessment metric to determine the importance of each feature. 
Additionally, we employed LIME[12] for token-level analysis of 
textual data. LIME is an algorithm designed to explain the local 
prediction behavior of complex models, with the core concept of 
constructing a simple, interpretable model to simulate the decision-
making of the complex model in the vicinity of specific data points. 
Based on the LIME algorithm, we are able to more clearly identify 
which parts of the textual data influence the model's decision-
making. We will provide a specific case in Section 3.3 to assist in 
illustrating the analysis results. 
3   Result 
We analyzed the physical examination data collected from 40 
elderly individuals at a nursing home. Table 1 describes the 
statistical characteristics of the study population. Compared to the 
non-MetS group, there were extremely significant differences in 
waist circumference, body mass index, triglycerides, and fasting 
blood glucose (p<0.01). 
Table 1: Statistical Characteristics of Volunteers with MetS 
and non-MetS 
Characteristics 
Mets 
Non-Mets 
N 
8 
32 
Sex (men%) 
12.50 
10.00 
Age 
74.88 
72.19 
Height (cm) 
157.44 
160.13 
Body Mass Index (BMI) 
28.21 
21.15 
Waist Circumference (cm) 
94.83 
80.28 
Systolic Blood Pressure (mmHg) 
143.88 
133.72 
Diastolic Blood Pressure (mmHg) 
79.63 
78.41 
High-Density Lipoprotein (mmol/L) 
1.51 
1.47 
Triglycerides (mmol/L) 
2.09 
1.36 
Fasting Blood Glucose (mmol/L) 
6.99 
5.42 
3.1 Comparison of Physiological Data for Assisting 
in the Diagnosis of MetS Risk  
We performed a random sampling on the original data that had been 
cleaned, with missing values and outliers excluded or imputed. We 
extracted data from eight individuals without MetS (170 sets) and 
compared it using a t-test with the original data from eight 
individuals with MetS (290 sets). The significantly different 
features are described in Appendix 2. The results indicate that daily  
Integrating Natural Language Processing and Exercise Monitoring 
for Early Diagnosis of Metabolic Syndrome: A Deep Learning 
Approach 
WOODSTOCK’18, June, 2018, El Paso, Texas USA 
 
 
Table 2: Assessment Results of Baseline, TS_HCL and TS_H
Model 
Datasets 
ACC(%) 
PRE(%) 
REC(%) 
F1(%) 
AUROC (%) 
Baseline
Train (Fold2, 3), Val (Fold1)
68.8 
70.1 
63.5 
66.7 
76.0 
 
Train (Fold1, 3), Val (Fold2)
72.3 
73.1 
68.8 
      70.9 
80.2 
 
Train (Fold1, 2), Val (Fold3)
71.4 
71.3 
70.0 
70.6 
79.7 
 
Average (Std) 
70.8 (1.47)
71.5 (1.24) 
67.5 (2.81) 
69.4 (1.94) 
78.6 (1.87) 
TS_H 
Train (Fold2, 3), Val (Fold1)
69.9 
72.0 
63.5 
67.5 
76.8 
 
Train (Fold1, 3), Val (Fold2)
71.7 
68.6 
78.2 
73.1 
83.5 
 
Train (Fold1, 2), Val (Fold3)
71.4 
70.5 
71.8 
71.1 
81.2 
 
Average (Std) 
71.0 (0.76)
70.4 (1.41) 
71.2 (6.02) 
70.6 (2.31) 
80.5 (2.79) 
TS_HCL
Train (Fold2, 3), Val (Fold1)
70.5 
71.3 
67.1 
69.1 
77.0 
Train (Fold1, 3), Val (Fold2)
69.1 
64.3 
83.5 
72.6 
82.3 
Train (Fold1, 2), Val (Fold3)
71.7 
68.6 
78.2 
73.1 
82.2 
 
Average (Std) 
70.4 (1.06)
68.0 (2.88) 
76.3 (6.87) 
71.6 (1.78) 
80.6 (2.53) 
 
minimum heart rate, maximum heart rate, and step count exhibit 
significant differences between the groups with and without MetS 
(p<0.01), showing potential in assisting the diagnosis of MetS. 
3.2 Model Evaluation Combined with NLP  
For the three proposed model architectures and hyperparameters, 
we employed grid search to identify the optimal combination of 
model architecture and hyperparameters, assessing the model 
performance based on the highest AUROC. The best model 
negative samples, TS_HCL incorporates the contrastive loss, 
resulting in the best classification performance compared to the 
baseline model and TS_H (as shown in Table 2). Overall, the TS_ 
HCL  performed the best AUROC, followed by TS_H. TS_HCL 
improved the AUROC by 2.0% comparing to the Baseline Model, 
and by 0.1% compared to TS_H. Besides, TS_HCL performed the 
best recall, which improved the REC by 8.8% comparing to the 
Baseline Model, and by 5.1% comparing to TS_H. This indicates 
that the TS_HCL model can better reduce the false-negative rate. 
The improvement of  the AUROC  and the REC illustrates the 
superiority of using contrastive loss for this task. 
Further investigation into the impact of the imbalance between 
positive (MetS) and negative (non-MetS) samples on the model's 
performance is shown in Figure 3. We alter the proportion of MetS 
in the training set and compare the model's performance on the test 
set using AUROC and ACC, as is shown in Figure 3. When the 
proportion of MetS is low (between 30% and 35%), the model is 
unable to correctly classify MetS and non-MetS; it tends to predict 
all training data as non-MetS. As the proportion of MetS increases, 
the model's performance increases too, and the model converges 
more rapidly. The model's performance reaches its peak when the 
positive and negative samples are balanced.  
3.3 Feature Importance Ranking 
To ascertain the contribution of textual and physiological data to 
the model, we employed an evaluation method based on the 
Permutation Feature Importance (PFI) algorithm to rank the 
features, as depicted in Appendix 3. The results indicate that when 
textual data is compromised, the model's assessment performance 
declines by approximately 21.2%, which is the greatest decrease; 
when the daily minimum heart rate data is compromised, the 
model's assessment performance declines by about 4.2%, which is 
the largest decrease among the physiological data when 
compromised, but significantly less than the impact of the textual 
data's failure on the model. In contrast, the decline is not significant 
after shuffling the daily maximum heart rate and daily step count, 
with reductions of only 1.2% and 0.8%, respectively. 
 
Figure 3: Influence of MetS Data Proportion on Model Effect. 
The horizontal axis represents the proportion of MetS data in 
the total data volume, and the vertical axis represents the 
average model performance evaluation (ACC and AUROC) 
across four folds. The figure also shows the 95% confidence 
interval. 
Thus, it can be concluded that the decision-making process of our 
model primarily relies on textual data. Furthermore, among the 
physiological data, the model evaluation mainly depends on the 
data for daily minimum heart rate. 
To delve deeper into which parts of the textual data affected the 
model's decision-making, we utilized LIME algorithm for token-
level analysis. Figure 4 presents the analysis results of the LIME 
algorithm on the textual data from a day of a MetS patient. This 
volunteer was correctly classified by the model as a MetS patient, 
and the primary aspect influencing the model's decision was the 
negative feelings expressed by this volunteer during or after 
exercise. 
WOODSTOCK’18, June, 2018, El Paso, Texas USA 
F. Surname et al. 
 
 
 
 
(a)                          (b)                                 (c) 
Figure 4: Token-level analysis using LIME on a case study. (a) 
The classification outcome of the model; (b) The contribution 
of different parts of the textual data to the model's decision-
making; (c) Text with highlighted words. The textual data is in 
Chinese, and for ease of understanding, we translated it into 
English: "I did household chores and sunbathed today, 
breaking into a slight sweat; in the afternoon I fetched the 
courier, felt a bit out of breath, and was very tired when 
climbing the stairs." 
4. Discussion 
Utilizing the high patient compliance, simple interaction, and user-
friendly advantages of NLP combined with exercise monitoring, 
we have constructed a machine learning model to predict the risk 
of MetS, in order to facilitate the diagnosis and enhance the 
probability of early diagnosis of MetS in the population. We 
designed 3 model architectures and selected the optimal model and 
parameters in the validation set. On the test set, the model reported 
a 
high 
positive 
result 
through 
3-fold 
cross-validation 
(AUROC=0.806). In addition, our model TS_HCL exhibited the 
highest Recall (REC=76.3%) compared to TS_H and the Baseline 
Model, suggesting that our model can avoid type II error more 
effectively, preventing patients suffering from the disease from not 
being treated in a timely manner due to model prediction errors. By 
ranking feature importance, we found that the decision process of 
this model is most dependent on text, indicating that the application 
of NLP to exercise monitoring can assist in the diagnosis of MetS. 
Consistent with current research on MetS, we concluded that 
exercise habits and capacity can to some extent reflect a person's 
risk of having MetS. Utilizing NLP to process personal descriptions 
of exercise habits and capacity can serve as a new method for early 
diagnosis in the management of MetS. 
NLP can be widely applied to the processing of sequential data. 
Early diagnosis of some diseases often becomes complex due to 
various factors in diagnostic indicators, and standard tests usually 
require a lot of experience and effort. Our study innovatively 
approaches the assessment of an individual's risk of MetS from the 
perspective of exercise capacity and ability to judge exercise habits, 
proposing the use of NLP to monitor text provided by volunteers 
describing their exercise capacity and habits, and has developed 
and validated the model accordingly. Since exercise texts often 
contain other factors in addition to the main research factors, such 
as weather and diet, which also affect the subjective feeling of 
exercise, these factors may also be reflected in the exercise texts. 
NLP can utilize this co-occurring information simultaneously, 
identify confounding information, and enhance the effectiveness 
and accuracy of the analysis of individual exercise habits and 
capacity, thereby achieving the accuracy and reliability of early 
diagnosis of MetS. 
Considering that the NLP-based exercise monitoring early 
diagnosis model for MetS is non-invasive, suitable for daily 
exercise health management, and can make up for the subjective 
and objective factors ignored by wearable device monitoring of 
exercise indicators, we believe that it can greatly improve user 
compliance and realize a new way of exercise early diagnosis for 
MetS. On the one hand, it is expected to promote the popularization 
of early diagnosis of MetS, and on the other hand, it is expected to 
address the issues of low diagnostic efficiency and high cost of 
MetS.  
Previous studies have also done a lot of work on the early diagnosis 
of MetS, mainly involving predictive models developed based on 
other machine learning methods and the biomarkers detection. 
Since 2015, most of the non-invasive predictive model studies on 
MetS have been about lifestyle-related characteristics and 
anthropometric characteristics[13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19], but these 
models mainly use anthropometric characteristics as the main 
features, and the role of lifestyle characteristics is not significant[20, 
21]. Our early diagnosis model starts from monitoring lifestyle 
characteristics, and its significant effect has been verified, which to 
some extent fills the gap in this field. 
The flexibility of deep learning poses a challenge in selecting the 
most appropriate neural network architectures for a specific dataset 
to achieve optimal model performance. Based on the information 
contained in the three modalities, we initially designed three model 
architectures (as shown in Figure 2) and then used a grid search to 
determine the best combination of hyperparameters. By evaluating 
the validation set, the TS_HCL (Figure 2(b)) performed the best. 
This model architecture first encodes daily text, followed by fusion 
with the daily step count, then fuses the features of the heart rate, 
and finally feeds them into the classification head. The two-step 
fusion implies the correlation among the three modalities with the 
designed loss function. Intuitively, we grouped the daily minimum 
and maximum heart rates together to allow the model to synthesize 
heart rate information; we grouped the daily text and daily step 
count together to enable the model to more comprehensively assess 
the individual's exercise duration and intensity. Furthermore, 
contrastively learning enhanced TS_H by introducing the 
contrastive loss, which has been proven to be effective for 
classification in many other domains. Table 2 demonstrates the 
model performance improvement with our designed model 
architecture and the introduction of contrastive loss. The average 
AUROC of TS_H is improved by 1.9% compared to the Baseline 
Model, while the average AUROC of TS_HCL is the highest 
among the three models, with an improvement of 2.0% compared 
to the Baseline Model. Meanwhile, TS_HCL performed the best 
recall. The REC of TS_HCL is improved by 8.8% compared to the 
Baseline Model, and by 5.1% compared to TS_H. 
When designing disease prediction models, the prevalence of the 
disease (i.e., class imbalance) significantly affects the model's 
performance. Using proper sample balancing techniques (e.g., data 
augmentation) can effectively improve the model's performance 
and generalizability, and ensure robust model when faced with real-
world imbalanced disease data. It is worth noting that most existing 
data augmentation techniques tend to generate new data that are 
correlated with the original data to a certain extent, resulting in the 
problem of homogenization, which may negatively impact on the 
deployment of the model in real world. It is crucial to have the 
developed model to be tested under different imbalance ratios, and 
select the model that meets the criteria for specific application. 
Integrating Natural Language Processing and Exercise Monitoring 
for Early Diagnosis of Metabolic Syndrome: A Deep Learning 
Approach 
WOODSTOCK’18, June, 2018, El Paso, Texas USA 
 
 
To enhance the interpretability of the model, when we performed 
feature importance ranking on the model, we found that the daily 
minimum heart rate also showed the second-highest weight in the 
model's decision-making process after textual data. Combined with 
the results of the significant comparison of the collected 
physiological data, there is indeed a very significant difference in 
daily minimum heart rate between the group with MetS and the 
non-MetS, and the coefficient of variation (CV=9.1%) of the MetS 
group is lower than that of the non-MetS group (CV=15.5%). 
Studies by Gupta and Schroeder[22, 23] have shown that low heart 
rate variability is related to cardiovascular diseases, and combined 
with the fact that MetS is also related to a series of cardiovascular 
risk factors, we believe that daily minimum heart rate may be an 
important feature for prediction, providing a guiding direction for 
the subsequent improvement of the model. 
To our knowledge, this is the first study to propose the use of NLP 
to monitor exercise capacity and habits, thereby assisting in the 
diagnosis of MetS. We have validated this hypothesis by collecting 
a dataset and establishing a model, which has achieved significant 
results. It not only provides a valuable supplement to existing 
models for predicting and managing the risk of MetS but also has 
the potential to be integrated into online tools to serve a larger 
group of potential patients. 
On the technical level, NLP addresses the limitations of monitoring 
capabilities affected by subjective and objective factors in wearable 
devices. By further collecting volunteers' exercise texts (including 
exercise time, exercise intensity, exercise type, physical condition, 
etc), it supplements the subjective and objective factors ignored by 
wearable devices in monitoring exercise indicators. On the 
economic level, the early diagnosis method through NLP can 
improve the current situation of high screening costs for MetS, and 
the non-invasive method also makes individuals more willing to 
undergo 
long-term 
health 
supervision, 
promoting 
the 
popularization of disease screening and health awareness, and 
vigorously developing the construction of healthy. 
A limitation of this study is that it still lacks the validation in 
generalizing the predictive model to a broader population. MetS is 
influenced by various factors such as race and environment. 
Although our method has been verified and tested in the current 
cohort, it is limited to a subset of the elderly population in a specific 
city in China, and its performance in other regions and ethnicities 
remains uncertain. The sample lacks diversity and requires 
assessment through more external validation datasets, especially 
those involving other ethnic populations.  
Secondly, during the experimental process, we found that the 
richness of the textual data provided by different volunteers varies 
due to differences in educational levels, which indirectly affects the 
accuracy of the model's judgment. During the formal experimental 
phase, we mitigated these differences and enhanced text quality by 
providing a text template. 
Our assessment of the most influential textual data may also have 
another interpretation. Due to the utilization of textual data as a 
multimodal model with the highest dimensionality among data 
modalities, it occupies a significant proportion in the model's 
predictions, while other data modalities may be overlooked. 
However, this also reflects that the analysis of textual data has 
certain effectiveness in the prediction of MetS. 
5. Conclusion 
Our study primarily utilized NLP to process the textual data 
collected from volunteers, developing a predictive model for MetS 
aimed at identifying potential individuals with MetS from the 
regular textual data provided by groups with existing risk factors. 
The model, after 3-fold cross-validation, reported a high positive 
result (AUROC=0.806 and REC=76.3%), demonstrating its 
practicality and reliability in future predictions of MetS. This will 
aid in promoting the advancement of digital and precision medicine 
in the early diagnosis and intervention among groups with potential 
risk factors for MetS, reducing the costs associated with widespread 
screening for MetS, thereby improving the disease management of 
MetS. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
R. H. Eckel, S. M. Grundy, and P. Z. Zimmet, ‘The metabolic syndrome’, 
Lancet Lond. Engl., vol. 365, no. 9468, pp. 1415–1428, Apr. 2005, doi: 
10.1016/S0140-6736(05)66378-7. 
[2] 
R. Li et al., ‘Prevalence of metabolic syndrome in mainland china: a meta-
analysis of published studies’, BMC Public Health, vol. 16, no. 1, p. 296, Apr. 
2016, doi: 10.1186/s12889-016-2870-y. 
[3] 
‘Report on Cardiovascular Health and Diseases in China 2022: an Updated 
Summary’, Biomed. Environ. Sci., vol. 36, no. 8, pp. 669–701, Aug. 2023, doi: 
10.3967/bes2023.106. 
[4] 
I. Dichi, A. N. C. Simão, H. Vannucchi, R. Curi, and P. C. Calder, ‘Metabolic 
syndrome: epidemiology, pathophysiology, and nutrition intervention’, J. Nutr. 
Metab., vol. 2012, p. 584541, 2012, doi: 10.1155/2012/584541. 
[5] 
N. Miyatake et al., ‘Comparison of ventilatory threshold and exercise habits 
between Japanese men with and without metabolic syndrome’, Diabetes Res. 
Clin. 
Pract., 
vol. 
77, 
no. 
2, 
pp. 
314–319, 
Aug. 
2007, 
doi: 
10.1016/j.diabres.2006.11.008. 
[6] 
M. F. Aktas et al., ‘Lifestyle interventions in Muslim patients with metabolic 
syndrome-a feasibility study’, Eur. J. Clin. Nutr., vol. 73, no. 5, pp. 805–808, 
May 2019, doi: 10.1038/s41430-018-0371-z. 
[7] 
J. A. Schrack, R. J. Dougherty, A. Corkum, F. Liu, and A. A. Wanigatunga, 
‘Impact of Time in Motion on Blood Pressure Regulation Among Patients with 
Metabolic Syndrome’, Curr. Hypertens. Rep., vol. 24, no. 10, pp. 395–412, Oct. 
2022, doi: 10.1007/s11906-022-01202-8. 
[8] 
M. Smuck, C. A. Odonkor, J. K. Wilt, N. Schmidt, and M. A. Swiernik, ‘The 
emerging clinical role of wearables: factors for successful implementation in 
healthcare’, Npj Digit. Med., vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 1–8, Mar. 2021, doi: 
10.1038/s41746-021-00418-3. 
[9] 
D. Nahavandi, R. Alizadehsani, A. Khosravi, and U. R. Acharya, ‘Application 
of artificial intelligence in wearable devices: Opportunities and challenges’, 
Comput. Methods Programs Biomed., vol. 213, p. 106541, Jan. 2022, doi: 
10.1016/j.cmpb.2021.106541. 
[10] 
E. Cambria and B. White, ‘Jumping NLP Curves: A Review of Natural 
Language Processing Research [Review Article]’, IEEE Comput. Intell. Mag., 
vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 48–57, May 2014, doi: 10.1109/MCI.2014.2307227. 
[11] 
K. Lv et al., ‘Detection of diabetic patients in people with normal fasting 
glucose using machine learning’, BMC Med., vol. 21, no. 1, p. 342, Sep. 2023, 
doi: 10.1186/s12916-023-03045-9. 
[12] 
M. T. Ribeiro, S. Singh, and C. Guestrin, ‘“Why Should I Trust You?”: 
Explaining the Predictions of Any Classifier’, Proc. 22nd ACM SIGKDD Int. 
Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Min., pp. 1135–1144, Aug. 2016, doi: 
10.1145/2939672.2939778. 
[13] 
G. O. Gutiérrez-Esparza, T. A. Ramírez-delReal, M. Martínez-García, O. 
Infante Vázquez, M. Vallejo, and J. Hernández-Torruco, ‘Machine and Deep 
Learning Applied to Predict Metabolic Syndrome without a Blood Screening’, 
Appl. Sci., vol. 11, no. 10, Art. no. 10, Jan. 2021, doi: 10.3390/app11104334. 
[14] 
J. Kim, S. Mun, S. Lee, K. Jeong, and Y. Baek, ‘Prediction of metabolic and 
pre-metabolic syndromes using machine learning models with anthropometric, 
lifestyle, and biochemical factors from a middle-aged population in Korea’, 
BMC Public Health, vol. 22, no. 1, p. 664, Apr. 2022, doi: 10.1186/s12889-
022-13131-x. 
WOODSTOCK’18, June, 2018, El Paso, Texas USA 
F. Surname et al. 
 
 
 
[15] 
M. Eyvazlou et al., ‘Prediction of metabolic syndrome based on sleep and work-
related risk factors using an artificial neural network’, BMC Endocr. Disord., 
vol. 20, no. 1, p. 169, Nov. 2020, doi: 10.1186/s12902-020-00645-x. 
[16] 
F.-H. Wang and C.-M. Lin, ‘The Utility of Artificial Neural Networks for the 
Non-Invasive Prediction of Metabolic Syndrome Based on Personal 
Characteristics’, Int. J. Environ. Res. Public. Health, vol. 17, no. 24, p. 9288, 
Dec. 2020, doi: 10.3390/ijerph17249288. 
[17] 
D.-Y. Hsiung, C.-W. Liu, P.-C. Cheng, and W.-F. Ma, ‘Using non-invasive 
assessment methods to predict the risk of metabolic syndrome’, Appl. Nurs. Res. 
ANR, vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 72–77, May 2015, doi: 10.1016/j.apnr.2014.12.001. 
[18] 
Q. Xu et al., ‘Using noninvasive anthropometric indices to develop and validate 
a predictive model for metabolic syndrome in Chinese adults: a nationwide 
study’, BMC Endocr. Disord., vol. 22, no. 1, p. 53, Mar. 2022, doi: 
10.1186/s12902-022-00948-1. 
[19] 
M. Romero-Saldaña et al., ‘Validation of a non-invasive method for the early 
detection of metabolic syndrome: a diagnostic accuracy test in a working 
population’, BMJ Open, vol. 8, no. 10, p. e020476, Oct. 2018, doi: 
10.1136/bmjopen-2017-020476. 
[20] 
M. K. Gupta et al., ‘Application of Indian Diabetic Risk Score (IDRS) and 
Community Based Assessment Checklist (CBAC) as Metabolic Syndrome 
prediction tools’, PloS One, vol. 18, no. 3, p. e0283263, 2023, doi: 
10.1371/journal.pone.0283263. 
[21] 
H. Shin, S. Shim, and S. Oh, ‘Machine learning-based predictive model for 
prevention of metabolic syndrome’, PloS One, vol. 18, no. 6, p. e0286635, 2023, 
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0286635. 
[22] 
E. B. Schroeder et al., ‘Diabetes, Glucose, Insulin, and Heart Rate Variability: 
The Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC) study’, Diabetes Care, vol. 
28, no. 3, pp. 668–674, Mar. 2005, doi: 10.2337/diacare.28.3.668. 
[23] 
J. M. Dekker et al., ‘Low heart rate variability in a 2-minute rhythm strip 
predicts risk of coronary heart disease and mortality from several causes: the 
ARIC Study. Atherosclerosis Risk In Communities’, Circulation, vol. 102, no. 
11, pp. 1239–1244, Sep. 2000, doi: 10.1161/01.cir.102.11.1239. 
 
