1
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1515/9783111085722-019
Big Data and the Computational Social Science of
Entrepreneurship and Innovation
Ningzi LI1,3, Shiyang LAI2,3, James EVANS2,3,4,∗
1 Booth School of Business, University of Chicago, USA
2 Department of Sociology, University of Chicago, USA
3 Knowledge Lab, University of Chicago, USA
4 Santa Fe Institute, USA
e-mail: ningzi@uchicago.edu, shiyanglai@uchicago.edu, jevans@uchicago.edu
Abstract. As large-scale social data explode and machine-learning methods evolve, schol-
ars of entrepreneurship and innovation face new research opportunities but also unique
challenges. This chapter discusses the difficulties of leveraging large-scale data to identify
technological and commercial novelty, document new venture origins, and forecast com-
petition between new technologies and commercial forms. It suggests how scholars can
take advantage of new text, network, image, audio, and video data in two distinct ways
that advance innovation and entrepreneurship research. First, machine-learning models,
combined with large-scale data, enable the construction of precision measurements that
function as system-level observatories of innovation and entrepreneurship across human
societies. Second, new artificial intelligence models fueled by big data generate ‘digital
doubles’ of technology and business, forming laboratories for virtual experimentation
about innovation and entrepreneurship processes and policies. The chapter argues for
the advancement of theory development and testing in entrepreneurship and innovation
by coupling big data with big models.
Key words: Entrepreneurship, venture funding, creative destruction, big data, digital
doubles, embeddings, virtual experiment, artificial intelligence (AI), large language
models (LLMs), deep neural networks (DNNs).
1. Introduction
The availability of large-scale social and cultural data has erupted across the social
sciences, and has expanded the scope and precision of research in entrepreneur-
ship and innovation. Passive sensors, from social media to cell phone apps, yield
rich traces of human and entrepreneurial cognition, communication, and behavior
(Aceves and Evans, 2023; Evans and Aceves, 2016). Online platforms like Crunch-
base and digital databases like Pitchbook and VentureXpert have also made com-
pany, transaction, research, and invention data and commentary more accessible
than ever before (Guzman and Li, 2023; McDonald and Eisenhardt, 2020; Zhang
∗Corresponding author.
arXiv:2505.08706v1  [econ.GN]  13 May 2025
and Guler, 2020). Beyond observational data, modern sensors have enabled the in-
strumentation of new venture experiments that enable causal inference regarding
the impact of organization, composition, and communication on entrepreneurial
outcomes (Hasan and Koning, 2019; Wright et al., 2023). In parallel with the rise
of big, unstructured social data, powerful machine learning methods have emerged
that compress these data into operational measures that can fit within and ex-
pand the scope of traditional statistical analyses. Even more recent artificial in-
telligence (AI) models have empowered the creation of data-driven simulations or
digital doubles that facilitate in silico experimentation of social and organizational
life (Vicinanza et al., 2023). These new models propose hypotheses for empirical
observation and experimentation (Aceves and Evans, 2023; Evans, 2022).
Large-scale social and business data are relevant to understanding many as-
pects of entrepreneurship and innovation, as they are also to many aspects of
organizational behavior and science and technology studies (STS). Nevertheless,
innovation and entrepreneurship face three special challenges that benefit more
directly from new data and new models than traditional organizations and STS
research. First, successful innovation and entrepreneurship are characterized by
novelty. New ventures involve novel combinations of technology, business oppor-
tunities, and skilled talent to build new products and services that compete with
potential rivals. When new firms experience outsized success, it unleashes a pro-
cess of creative destruction (Schumpeter, 2013), whereby the novel organization
clears the field and ‘destroys demand’ for competing technologies. Modeling en-
trepreneurial ventures and predicting their success requires the identification of
venture novelty, which imposes a unique data burden on entrepreneurial science.
Why? The amount of data required to identify an organizational or market trend is
at least twice that required to characterize a modal tendency. The data required to
identify whether a new venture represents a novel combination of business or mar-
ket elements, however, require a nearly complete characterization of all that went
before. In other words, novelty estimation requires models sufficient to explain the
vast majority of new and existing organizations, and this, in turn, requires much
more data and computation than identifying a tendency or trend (Shi and Evans,
2023; Uzzi et al., 2013; Wang et al., 2017).
A second, related special challenge concerns the study of origins and is shared
by scholars and scientists who focus on origins questions in other domains. Data
are forged, structured, and preserved through stable, mature systems. In the social
sciences, data are collected and preserved by institutions (e.g., from ancient tem-
ples to modern states and corporations). In the natural world, data are preserved
when conditions are stable and persist over long periods of time. As a result,
the origins of space, time, matter, life, biological species, human language, cities,
emerging organizations, technologies, and ideas possess fewer data. By the same
token, entrepreneurial ventures are not required to financially report many details
of their operations. Unlike large, stable firms, new ventures rapidly evolve and
pivot in relation to emerging opportunities (Fink and Reeves, 2019; Ries, 2011).
This instability and lack of reporting requirements means that much less data are
available on new ventures than persistent firms, making systematic science more
challenging. Similarly, innovations in science and technology are least likely to be
accounted for accurately in history (Merton, 1957; Stigler, 1980). Thomas Kuhn
demonstrated that the most innovative discoveries and inventions are typically
attributed incorrectly, because they take time and experimentation to understand
(Kuhn, 1962). Fortunately, data are increasingly available in the context of new
venture emergence, ranging from the environments of emerging firms to the digital
traces of business discourse contemporary to them. New ventures, like all new or-
ganizations, reflect their environments more than established firms (Stinchcombe,
2013) and so increased data, newly available for representation and analysis, pro-
vide the entrepreneurial analyst with rich new opportunities for understanding.
Vera Rocha and Theodor Vladasel (Chapter 13, this volume) share a similar con-
cern in their chapter and they actively pursue new forms of data to tackle this
challenge.
A third special challenge involved in the study of entrepreneurship and inno-
vation relates to the difficulty associated with identifying functional equivalence
among new venture and innovation components. As described above, creative de-
struction involves the replacement of one product, service, component, company,
or industry with another. This has historically been traced but not anticipated by
entrepreneurship scholars (Akcigit and Reenen, 2023; Aghion and Howitt, 1990).
Most commonly, scholars measure functional equivalency ex post with the dif-
fusion of a successful innovation or the emergence of a successful firm (Abbott
and DeViney, 1992; Mizruchi, 1993; Caballero, 2010; Mizruchi, 1993). Sometimes
scholars have studied it negatively through the failure of other products and firms
‘nearby’ (Borchert and Cardozo, 2010; Foster, 2010). Building a predictive science
of innovation requires new data on the character of products and services that
would allow us to predict their functional relationships. Fortunately, digital data
are increasingly available on the description and semantic content of products
and services. Combined with dramatically improved AI models, like neural net-
work transformers that can discern subtle differences in meaning, these data hold
the potential to qualitatively anticipate and automatically compare inventions,
products, and companies at both high resolution and scale.
These three challenges suggest an incongruity. On the one hand, they suggest
the importance and potential of large-scale data for transforming our understand-
ing of entrepreneurship and innovation. On the other, they highlight the unique
challenges that entrepreneurial research has faced to assemble and benefit from
those data. The result has been that much entrepreneurship research has remained
qualitative in character. For this reason, much business school pedagogy on en-
trepreneurship has been ceded to expert practitioners with a handful of mixed
entrepreneurial experiences, who are presumed to have insights of comparable or
even superior legitimacy to those of scholars who have studied a roughly equal
handful of business cases. Pedagogy surrounding innovation is further stymied by
the innovation paradox, where as successful principles of innovation become insti-
tutionalized, they cease to be a source of innovation in business and society (Cao
et al., 2022).
In this chapter, we explore how demand for data in the study of en-
trepreneurship and innovation is increasingly being met with new text data on
entrepreneurial communications and descriptions, network data on social and in-
stitutional relationships, and images, audio, and video data associated with new
firm environments, inputs, and outputs. We further explore how the recent shift
from measurements to models of large-scale data allow us to create digital dou-
bles of public and private innovation systems, which function both as system-
level observatories for descriptive understanding, on the one hand, and virtual
laboratories enabling detailed simulation that could accelerate theoretical devel-
opment and testing, on the other. These properties are especially important for
entrepreneurship and innovation because data for observations are sparse and for-
mal experiments are difficult except in the earliest stages of new venture creation
(Koning, 2016). We argue that new data-driven models of entrepreneurship and
innovation hold the potential to raise the quality of these sciences, transform edu-
cation based on them to outcompete personal experience and anecdote, and even
contribute to the emerging trend of data-driven investment, selection, and even
technological and entrepreneurial catalysis.
1.1. New Data Relevant to Entrepreneurship and Innovation
The advancement of computational research within entrepreneurship and inno-
vation hinges on leveraging emerging opportunities presented by big data. New
data opportunities hinge on (1) the availability of new sources available for prob-
ing entrepreneurship, innovation, and the business and technological background
against which they arise; and (2) new methodologies that can ‘datify’ unstructured
information into representations that can be tapped to yield new insights. In the
paragraphs that follow, we delineate emerging new data in four significant data
categories. These include network data, text data, image data, and audio data.
Then we discuss two broad approaches to these sources of information. The first is
the data approach, whereby information is extruded or distilled into rectangular
matrix form and treated like any other received or collected data for traditional
statistical analysis and causal inference regarding entrepreneurship and innova-
tion. The second is the model approach, which creates a data-driven digital dou-
ble of the system from which innovation and entrepreneurship emerge and uses it
both to observe these phenomena like a high-resolution telescope, and to genera-
tively simulate these phenomena to facilitate virtual experiments and hypothesis
testing. We argue that data and modelbased approaches are complementary, and
together unleash the power of emerging data and computation.
1.1.1. Network Data
Network data have long represented the vanguard of data-driven investigations
in entrepreneurship and innovation. Historically, researchers delved into a wide
range of relevant network forms. Traditional use of network data and analysis re-
lated to business and new venture innovation includes interlocking directorates,
which shed light on corporate influence and diffusion through shared board mem-
berships (Davis, 1991; Heemskerk, 2013); venture capital co-investment networks
(Podolny, 1997; Podolny and Castellucci, 1999; Werth and Boeert, 2013); pat-
terns of employee migration between firms, which illuminate the transmission of
knowledge and the spatial dispersion of skills (Woodruff and Zenteno, 2007); hier-
archical schematics (or org-charts) within organizations, clarifying the distribution
of power and pathways of information flow (Ennis, 1961; Owen-Smith and Powell,
2008); input–output tables, which provide a macroeconomic perspective on the
transactions between firms and sectors (McNerney, 2009); collaboration networks
that connect inventors and researchers, highlighting joint efforts propelling innova-
tion (Guimera et al., 2005); and networks defined by interconnections among tech-
nology and knowledge themselves, analyzed through patent classification to assess
the emergence and spread of technological innovation (Pennings and Harianto,
1992; Shi et al., 2015; Shi and Evans, 2023; Sourati and Evans, 2023). Each of
these data forms has contributed to our understanding of mechanisms underpin-
ning entrepreneurship and the genesis of innovation.
1.1.2. Text Data
Text data have become the most plentiful form of data available for analysis about
entrepreneurship and innovation, given their critical role in signaling novel value
and catalyzing potential exchanges (Evans and Aceves, 2016). In the traditional
entrepreneurship and innovation research, text analysis was either qualitative and
interpretive in nature, or reduced text to tabulations of word counts. Company ma-
terials, investor communication, organizational histories, and founder interviews
provided narrative depth but lacked scalable analysis (Giudici, 2005), except us-
ing brittle dictionary methods that lacked a holistic understanding of meaning in
context (Roundy and Asllani, 2019; Suárez et al., 2021). Patent documents, often
parsed for their classification codes, offered glimpses into technological progression
(Fleming and Sorenson, 2001; Thompson and Fox-Kean, 2005).
Newly accessible data streams have enriched the textual landscape. (1) Rich
descriptions of firms, as narrated in the fast-paced arena of business news and
online information services (e.g., Crunchbase, PitchBook, VentureXpert), offer a
granular view of company evolution designed to serve active investors and job
seekers (Guzman and Li, 2023). (2) The textual content of proposals reveals in-
tentions and strategies underlying new business endeavors (Bromham et al., 2016).
(3) Patents and academic publications trace the trajectory of discovery and tech-
nological advancement from conception to implementation (Bromham et al., 2016;
Hofstra et al., 2020; Park et al., 2023). (4) Product fact sheets and descriptions
provide detailed accounts of product innovations, embedding technical specifica-
tions within the language of market appeal and consumer need (Silver et al.,
2022). (5) Employee reviews and company responses on platforms like GlassDoor
furnish insights into company culture and employee experience, providing a dual
perspective of firms as workplaces and self-conscious business entities (Campbell
and Shang, 2022; Dube and Zhu, 2021). (6) Business-oriented social media profiles,
particularly on platforms like LinkedIn, offer a crowd-sourced wealth of data on
professional networks, skill distributions, and industry trends (Alaql et al., 2023).
(7) Emerging access to internal corporate communications, such as emails and
instant messages, have allowed researchers to observe the informal and formal dis-
course within companies (Zha et al., 2016). In all, tapping these rich veins of newly
available text, researchers can paint a more comprehensive and nuanced picture of
the entrepreneurial and innovation landscape, providing insights broader in scope
and deeper in detail than before.
In the ‘text as data’ approach, people engage with the wealth of textual infor-
mation by converting the unstructured raw text into structured, analyzable forms
(Evans, 2022; Gentzkow et al., 2019; Grimmer et al., 2022). This process often
involves text-mining techniques that transform narratives and qualitative content
into quantifiable features. Through this lens, a patent transforms into a broad
array of indicators reflecting innovation, similar to how Gianluca Carnabuci and
Balázs Kovács argue in their chapter on patent data (Chapter 14, this volume)
that these data will complement traditional patent variables. GlassDoor reviews
are distilled into metrics of employee sentiment, and the sprawling narratives of
firm histories are encoded into timelines and trends. These preprocessed, struc-
tured, and spreadsheet-friendly data allow researchers to apply statistical models
to text, creating an empirical basis for measuring variables such as sentiment and
topical prevalence. Variables can be constructed to represent abstract concepts
like innovation, strategic orientation, and distinctiveness, making it possible to
conduct large-scale studies that correlate these aspects with business outcomes
(Bellstam et al., 2021; Guzman and Li, 2023; Taeuscher et al., 2022). Another ap-
proach draws upon data compression techniques, from matrix factorization (Du-
mais, 2004) to topic modeling (Chandra et al., 2016; Singh et al., 2023) to neural
auto-encoding (Aceves and Evans, 2023; Veitch et al., 2019), to generate unnamed
features that distinguish documents and statements in ways that reflect expressed
meanings. By quantifying the qualitative, this approach enables a new dimension
of analysis, turning textual artifacts into rich sources of data ripe for hypothesis
testing and causal inference.
The ‘text as model’ approach enables us to delve into a more sophisticated
use of textual data that transcends traditional analysis and draws on the logic
of Alan Turing’s ‘Imitation Game’ (Turing, 2009). Deep-learning algorithms act
as the modern engine for this approach, enabling us to encode vast amounts of
unstructured text into a model space that retains a compressed description of
the data, while enabling the simulation of counterfactual text. These models may
encapsulate the essence of individual firm communications, while simultaneously
capturing the nuanced tapestry of social, cultural, and strategic contexts within
which new enterprises and technological breakthroughs take shape. By transform-
ing raw text into multi-dimensional representations2 with minimal distortion, the
models do more than just provide retrospective insight. They can serve as vir-
tual laboratories in which we can simulate and predict the future (Evans, 2022).
We can forecast the ripple effects of innovation, predict market responses to new
products, and understand how shifts in cultural and economic climates might in-
fluence entrepreneurial success or failure (Aceves and Evans, 2023; Foster et al.,
2015). Furthermore, this approach allows us to explore the interconnectedness of
elements within the entrepreneurial ecosystem. For example, through embedding
texts, one can elucidate how the interplay between emerging technologies and reg-
ulatory frameworks might shape the viability and adoption of innovations (Belikov
et al., 2020).
1.1.3. Image Data
Image data also play an emerging role in the landscape of entrepreneurship and
innovation research. While traditional approaches have relied on qualitative anal-
yses of corporate logos and visual intelligence gathered from firm infrastructure,
settings, and interpersonal interactions (Dowling, 2000), the advent of new data
forms is adding a powerful new dimension to our understanding of corporate iden-
tity and culture.
Contemporary datasets are beginning to encompass visual content that could
provide deeper insights into corporate and product branding. This visual repos-
itory includes: (1) video footage which spans slick advertisements designed to
entice consumers, to company profile videos that communicate corporate values
and strategic direction (Li et al., 2021). (2) The curated images of founders and
key personnel are more than mere headshots (Choudhury et al., 2019). In the same
way that mugshots have begun to revolutionize the analysis of judicial decisions
(Ludwig and Mullainathan, 2022), corporate headshots reflect a company’s diver-
sity and ethos, and can even become a part of the company’s innovation story,
resonating or repelling potential customers and investors (Kamiya et al., 2019). (3)
Product photographs, beyond showcasing features and design, can subtly commu-
nicate signals regarding innovation and quality associated with a brand, forming
an essential part of a firm’s visual lexicon (Bu et al., 2022). Moreover, (4) per-
sonal and corporate profiles on business social media, like LinkedIn, offer a gallery
of personas and impressions that convey public identities (Nguyen et al., 2021).
Images shared across social media platforms extend this narrative by portraying
company culture, events, and the day-to-day reality of work environments, which
can be mined with image analytics to characterize otherwise invisible distinctions
and similarities.
The ‘image as data’ approach aims to systematically decipher visual data
points. By extracting sentiment and predicting attributes such as identity (e.g.,
2These representations are considered high dimensional with respect to traditional two or
three dimensional models of meaning common in cognitive and cultural science (Osgood et al.,
1957), but low dimensional with respect to the vast number of distinct words used in discourse,
which might otherwise be each represented as a categorically independent dimension.
demographic inferences like the prevalence or sparsity of ubiquitous ‘white men’)
or diversity levels, researchers can incorporate these insights into traditional sta-
tistical models. As with text, image2vec approaches can encode images, generating
coordinates in a high dimensional image space that characterize meaningful dif-
ferences in the objects and settings represented within them (Jo et al., 2018).
An image is worth a thousand words, and many of these models contain nearly
a thousand dimensions that allow complex proximity assessments. These meth-
ods enable the quantitative analysis of visual elements, providing a structured
way to evaluate visual branding, firm composition, and cultural dimensions of its
experienced environment.
Pushing the envelope, the ‘image as model’ approach takes a different approach
to visual data analysis. Encoding images through advanced computational tech-
niques like generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Ludwig and Mullainathan,
2022) has enabled the discovery of new dimensions that define corporate and
product imagery (Hua et al., 2007). Generative image models also facilitate the
automatic production of new images and video footage, thereby enabling a pre-
dictive understanding of visual trends and their implications for innovation and
brand perception (Li et al., 2021). This modeling technique has the potential to
unveil patterns and insights that can inform strategic branding decisions and fore-
cast emerging visual trends that characterize the entrepreneurial and innovation
ecosystem.
1.1.4. Audio Data
Audio data, compared with the previous three forms of data, are markedly less
explored in the context of entrepreneurship and innovation research. Researchers
classically collected audio data primarily through interviews and communication
events, such as press conferences and investor pitches. These auditory snapshots,
though limited, were reduced to text and provided critical insights into the rhetoric
and narratives that business leaders used to influence stakeholders and shape
public perception (Mauney and Walker, 2004; Pennebaker and Lay, 2002).
In the current digital era, the landscape of audio data in entrepreneurship
and innovation research has expanded significantly, encompassing a variety of
new forms that enrich the auditory dimension of business analysis. (1) Adver-
tisements, including not only text but also audio, for example, can be mined to
induce firms’ strategic communication and positioning (Rodero, 2020). (2) The
prevalence of online meeting applications, like Zoom, have generated an expand-
ing array of audio data from business meetings, ranging from virtual new venture
pitches to stakeholder meetings (Chakraborty et al., 2024). (3) Furthermore, social
media has arisen as a fertile ground for entrepreneurial voices, with audio broad-
casts emerging as vital channels for the dissemination of entrepreneurial ideas
and insights (Grewal et al., 2021). (4) The rich audio tapestry of investor pitch
sessions, particularly those broadcast on entrepreneurial television programs, pro-
vides unique opportunities to dissect the communication strategies that correlate
with fundraising success (Markowitz et al., 2023). Finally, (5) video that synchro-
nizes audio with images is increasingly available for analysis using new tools for
video learning, modeling, and understanding (Kaminski et al., 2017).
The ‘audio as data’ approach focuses on the extraction and quantitative anal-
ysis of information from audio recordings. Through advanced signal processing
and natural language processing techniques, researchers can convert speech into
accurate transcripts, capturing the textual content of verbal communications.
Transcription facilitates the analysis of language use, communication style, and
information exchange. Beyond mere transcription, this approach extends to the
assessment of speech sentiment, the stance of the speech, and speaker identity
recognition (Fan and Hansen, 2010; Rao et al., 2021). In sum, this approach har-
nesses the power of computational analysis to distill audio waveform data into
variables, which can be analyzed with statistical models to uncover patterns and
draw conclusions about entrepreneurial behaviors, strategies, and outcomes.
The ‘audio as model’ approach encodes the audio data into deep neural net-
works (DNNs) to preserve rich and detailed information and enable simulation.
This approach allows analysts to identify latent dimensions within audio. Re-
searchers have extracted tagging features through optimized DNN models to fa-
cilitate the building of a virtual business assistant for audio tagging tasks (El-
metwally et al., 2023). Alternatively, it offers the potential to simulate future
audio scenarios based on identified patterns (Beguš, 2021). By identifying the
acoustic signatures of successful business communication, it becomes possible to
generate simulated voices and audio environments (Purdy, 2023). The synthetic
audio embeddings that result could serve as an immersive green field for investiga-
tion, supporting experimental platforms that allow researchers and industry actors
to investigate effective communication and presentation techniques for showcasing
business innovation. By mirroring situations that have historically resonated with
investors and stakeholders, these environments facilitate the exploration of strate-
gies that lead to successful engagements. As with image and video models, audio
modeling raises complex ethical questions. Insofar as entrepreneurs and innova-
tors can learn how to convey their ideas more persuasively, investors and decision
makers will need better discriminative models in the arms race most visible in the
generation and filtration of mis- and disinformation in society.
While effective utilization of new data across the four forms described above
unveils fresh avenues for investigating entrepreneurship and innovation, their inte-
gration augments this potential by enabling construction of a data-driven digital
double of the entrepreneurial or innovation target under analysis. For example,
combining image and text data from business social media, analysts can more
closely measure and model how entrepreneurs and investors present themselves
to their human audiences (Martinec and Salway, 2005). Moreover, by interlinking
different forms of data through simulated social, experiential, or cognitive pro-
cesses, our predictions can markedly improve. Consider one of our recent papers
in which we sought to predict the distribution of new materials discovered to have
valuable energy-related or therapeutic properties. To begin, we replicated predic-
tions by modeling scientific text alone (Tshitoyan et al., 2019). We then interlinked
properties and materials from article text with article authors by simulating the
socio-cognitive process of discovery using random walks over the hypergraph of
articles. For example, we began with a property (e.g., COVID treatment), then
jumped to a random article with the property (e.g., ‘Effect of interferon alpha and
cyclosporine treatment...on Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus...’) to
a random author on the article (e.g., John Nicholls) to another random article by
the author (e.g., ‘Evaluation of the human adaptation of influenza A/H7N9...’) to
a random author on the article (e.g., Michael Chan) to another random article by
the author (e.g., “Production of amphiregulin and recovery from influenza...”) to
a random author on that article (e.g., Sabra Klein) to another article by that au-
thor (e.g., “Progesterone-based therapy protects against influenza...”) to a random
material on that article (e.g., Progesterone). These walks simulated the cognitive
availability of a hypothesis that some material had a valuable property (e.g., Pro-
gesterone is an effective COVID treatment for men) through human experience
and communication (e.g., Sabra Klein, who knew progesterone, had a conversa-
tion with Michael Chan, who conferenced with John Nicholls, who understood
COVID), which led to a clinical trial and demonstration (e.g., at Cedar-Sinai
Hospital connected with the University of California, Los Angeles.) Modeling this
socio-cognitive process with millions of random walks instead of the text alone
improved our predictions of discovered innovations by 400 percent for the case of
COVID therapeutics, and an average of 100 percent across hundreds of diseases
and electrical materials (Sourati and Evans, 2023). Linking data through sim-
ulated processes of discovery, invention, and diffusion enables the identification
of high-dimensional proximities that promote better measurement and modeling,
as illustrated above. In this way, new data forms can be extruded into tradi-
tional variables for statistical analysis (e.g., text, images, networks ‘as data’),
but the modeling approach offers richer, unexplored opportunities for research
on entrepreneurship, innovation, and social and strategic dynamics more broadly
(Aceves and Evans, 2023).
1.2. Big Data and Digital Doubles of Entrepreneurship and Innovation
‘Big’ unstructured or semi-structured data is difficult to incorporate directly into
social scientific analyses of entrepreneurship and innovation. For example, the
character of constructed network data on the configuration of innovative ideas
and technologies often violates simple network analysis and metrics. When using
context to create the path distance between components, like patent classes in-
volved in an invention, most components within the system may be within two
to three steps, the ‘friend of a friend’ (Shi et al., 2015). The resulting ‘hairball’
networks are far too dense to perform any traditional network analysis procedures
without thresholding (e.g., stronger ties equal 1; weaker ties equal 0). Such choices
remove important data and miss critical phenomena, however, like Granovetter’s
well-known ‘strength of weak ties’ within a system (Granovetter, 1973). More per-
vasively, big unstructured data often can only become structured through inferring
connectedness through proximity, as with language models where words become
linked through shared context (e.g., Word2Vec) (Mikolov et al., 2013). These im-
plicit connections, crucial for finding patterns in and extracting structure from big
data, also represent hidden confounders that violate traditional statistical models’
standard independence assumptions. The pervasive presence of ‘social influence’
in big data creates a web of interdependencies among data points that starkly con-
trasts with the small-scale, sparsely interconnected datasets previously utilized by
researchers that allowed analysts to preserve the illusion that they satisfied re-
strictive statistical assumptions (Karlsson and Krijthe, 2023). This has also led
complex correlations in big data to become misconstrued as causal links.
Another challenge with big data is that the compression of multi-dimensional
data into fewer predictive variables can lead to significant information loss. This
dimension reduction process tends to favor confirmation over the discovery of
novel insights, as it overlooks the capacity of big data to illuminate unanticipated
patterns and relationships. In image recognition, dimensionality reduction tech-
niques that simplify data into principal components may overlook subtle visual
cues critical for identifying emerging patterns. For example, studies in facial recog-
nition have demonstrated that image compression algorithms such as ‘Eigenface’
adversely impact system accuracy when encountering novel facial expressions or
features not well represented in the training set (Mulyono et al., 2019). Consider
a recent policy paper that sought to predict whether judges would grant bail.
Computational economists Jens Ludwig and Sendhil Mullainathan built a GAN
model to encode the booking photos of the accused, then gave the face model and
unnamed dimensions most predictive of positive bail determinations to human
annotators (Ludwig and Mullainathan, 2022). The annotators could intuitively
recognize these previously unnamed dimensions as grooming and heavy-facedness.
Better-groomed and heavier-faced defendants were much more likely to be granted
bail and set free. These discovered qualities individually explained almost as much
in predicting judgments as gender (i.e., women were also much more likely to be
set free). If the authors had instead projected the data down to theorized dimen-
sions, they would not only have lost the opportunity to discover new forms of bias
in the system, but also have strongly sacrificed predictive capacity.
By accounting for complex variable interactions, data-driven models can resolve
these challenges and better predict and simulate complex outcomes such as those
underlying entrepreneurial and innovation success. We highlight the particularly
promising strategy of developing data-driven models that create digital doubles of
entrepreneurial firms, innovative systems, and their underlying processes including
strategic search, decision making, knowledge dissemination, quality assurance, and
complex competition (Domingos and VEVE, 2018).
Digital doubles act as data-driven virtual counterparts to their real-world en-
tities. They are increasingly used in domains where first-principles models are in-
sufficient to explain and predict the majority of variation in a phenomenon. Even
in the most ‘organized’ natural scientific subjects, such as chemistry, satisfiable
prediction through first principles alone is unattainable. Simple models of bond
formation do not equip us to forecast either the structure or function of complex
structures like polymers or proteins. In protein folding, the AlphaFold models,
developed by Google subsidiary DeepMind, facilitate protein structure prediction
that so dramatically outstrip first-principles models with a digital double based
inferred on a large language model (LLM) architecture (Senior et al., 2020) that
it received the 2024 Nobel Prize in Chemistry. This gap between first principles
and outcomes is particularly pronounced in the complex and dynamic arenas of
entrepreneurship and innovation, where the interplay of myriad factors leads to
unforeseen discoveries and technology breakthroughs (Cao et al., 2022). In these
domains, we argue that the role of digital doubles could be invaluable, offering
rich, predictive simulations to navigate the complex and evolving landscape where
traditional models cannot.
Data-driven digital doubles are characterized by a twin character, as system-
level observatories and virtual laboratories. They represent system-level observa-
tories in the form of high-dimensional ‘embeddings’ that replicate simulated sys-
tems with fidelity, allowing for data analysis that mirrors system dynamics with
minimal distortion. These embeddings open new opportunities for analyzing en-
trepreneurship and innovation. For example, in measuring technological similarity,
past researchers have typically depended on a code-based methodology, utilizing
classifications such as the American Patent Classification, and International or
Cooperative Patent Classification (IPC/CPC). By projecting patent texts into an
embedding space constructed from text and diagrams, however, researchers can
capture a broader spectrum of patented technologies (Aceves and Evans, 2023; Li
et al., 2018; Shi and Evans, 2023). Technology terms, patent classes, patented tech-
nologies, and corporate patent portfolios can all be projected to these spaces, with
higher-level groupings (e.g., patent portfolio) the centroid, or high-dimensional av-
erage, of lower-level groupings (e.g., technology patent class). This approach allows
for the precise calculation of similarities between technology units as cosine dis-
tances within an embedding space (Hain et al., 2022). Furthermore, they allow
us to infer innovation-relevant dimensions within these embedding spaces, such as
how technologies array along the ‘medical’ vs. ‘engineering’ dimension, which may
be calculated simply as the cosine distance of a patent and the subtraction of the
word vectors for ‘medical’ and ‘engineering’ (Kwak et al., 2020; An et al., 2018;
Kozlowski et al., 2019). Embeddings also enable the identification of self-labeling
coordinates around which technologies cluster, which represent a more precise
and scale-able advance in context-sensitive topic modeling (Arseniev-Koehler et
al., 2022).
Insofar as ‘digital doubles’ are constructed as generative models (e.g., LLMs,
described in detail below), they can also function as virtual laboratories, enabling
researchers to conduct simulations of various innovation scenarios, such as the
merger of different technologies, the implications of a technology applied to a new
market application, or the receptivity of an audience to a new product, service,
or firm. This is a complementary approach to the field experiments discussed by
Chiara Spina and Sharique Hasan (Chapter 20 of this volume) to better under-
stand idea formation in innovation and entrepreneurship. Simulations provided by
digital doubles could extend to the realm of policy, where digital doubles can test
the impact of policy shifts on innovation and entrepreneurial activity (Kumar et
al., 2021). By harnessing this dual capability, digital doubles offer an expansive
toolkit for researchers and policymakers alike, facilitating a deeper understanding
of complex systems and the exploration of future possibilities.
1.3. Digital Doubles from Deep Neural Network Transformers
DNNs are currently a dominant architecture for digital doubles (Domingos and
VEVE, 2018). DNNs are a class of data-driven models, characterized by an ensem-
bled architecture of many nonlinear models, roughly analogous to neural synapses
in the brain, interconnected across layers from data inputs to predicted or gen-
erated outputs. The outcomes of lower-level models feed inputs to higher-level
models that ultimately predict desired outcomes or generate desired outputs. Dis-
tinguished from statistical and even other machine-learning methods, DNNs are
designed to search through vast spaces of interactions between variables and iden-
tify those most predictive of the outcome in question. This exploration is not
limited to merely processing observable inputs; rather, DNNs synthesize novel,
synthetic variables within their enigmatic internal constructs known as ‘hidden
variables.’ These variables, which are not explicitly part of the input data, emerge
through the network’s learning process, reflecting complex, nonlinear relation-
ships that the network infers from the data itself. ‘Learning’ in a DNN typically
relies on an optimization procedure involving the sequential updating of nonlinear
regression weights using the partial derivative of the model’s error, propagated
through the chain rule of calculus, to a proposed adjustment to each weight in a
process called back-propagation (Miikkulainen et al., 2024). In this way, a critical
DNN capacity involves their capacity to model, predict, and discover mechanisms
underlying complex systems. Many DNNs are ‘feed forward’ models, tuned to pre-
dict targeted outcomes like complex nonlinear regressions. These might be trained
to anticipate when and whether an entrepreneurial firm might go public, or if a
patented technology will become a ‘hit.’ Other DNNs are ‘autoencoders,’ tuned to
encode, predict, and ‘describe’ their input data, like complex nonlinear factoriza-
tion models (e.g., PCA, SVD, factor analysis). These might create a vector space
that compresses evolving business discourse (Cao et al., 2023) and allows one to
calculate the distance between firms within that space (Aceves and Evans, 2023).
Transformers represent a new family of DNN generative auto-encoders intro-
duced by Google researchers in 2017 (Vaswani et al., 2017), which underlie modern
LLMs. LLMs encode language sequences into powerful models that form digital
doubles of the discursive systems they represent, just as the AlphaFold trans-
former forms a digital double of the proteins it simulates. These models include
multiple layers of ‘self-attention,’ where words or other system components are
predictively linked to one another in a complex matrix that maximizes their ulti-
mate ability to predict masked or future words. Through this training, ChatGPT
and similar LLMs become digital doubles of their training data (e.g., text from the
internet) that can model and reproduce what humans would write given prompts.
LLMs do not memorize exact utterances from their training texts but learn the la-
tent functions capable of generating language conforming to shared discourse. An
analyst can program these models with natural language, prompting them with
text to evoke a specific discourse. The LLM then optimizes its response based
on the underlying embedding that captures syntactic, semantic, and even prag-
matic relevance (Dai et al., 2022; Von Oswald et al., 2023). The newest LLMs are
multimodal models that not only encode text, but also images, audio, and other
associated data.
In the context of entrepreneurship and innovation, the power of transformers
can be used in the dual ways described above. On the one hand, transformers
enable the formation of high-dimensional, geometrically interpretable knowledge
spaces available for detailed analysis that function as observatories of the systems
they encode. Through these powerful macroscopes, entities (e.g., innovators, tech-
nologies, new ventures, inventive regions) are rendered in context to reflect precise
distances between them based on complex linkages in the underlying data. Sec-
ond, transformers are generative models, and like ChatGPT, can function as vir-
tual laboratories to simulate outcomes of their represented system to experimental
provocation (e.g., technical advances predicted to result from specific funding or
within specific regions). Transformers can also support the estimation of struc-
tural models to causally identify the impact of funding on entrepreneurial success,
regional proximity on collaborative innovation, and a host of other potential mod-
els.
At the beginning of this chapter, we highlighted three unique challenges in the
study of entrepreneurship and innovation that could benefit from big data: the
vexing measurement of novelty in new ventures and innovations, the data-poor
study of origins in business and technology, and the need to identify functional
equivalence in order to measure processes of creative destruction. Here we illus-
trate how each of these challenges can be supported by LLMs, and how each
case highlights different aspects of LLMs that can support entrepreneurial and
innovation research.
LLMs support the evaluation of novelty by encoding the discourse of a society
or market within a comprehensive embedding space in which every entrepreneurial
or innovation-relevant concept, technology, use case, or new venture description
can be projected with precision. Insofar as the components of a technology, its link-
age to a business use case, or the language of a company description are highly
probable outcomes of the LLM, then they are not novel but rather follow the
flow of discourse in business and society. Insofar as these are highly improbable
or perplexing to the model, however, then they combine concepts, technologies,
business cases, and market scenarios in ways that are novel and surprising to
the system. This usage of the LLM underscores its capacity to encode the na-
ture of the system such that technology or new venture description, projected
to its embedding, enables the model to simulate the system’s surprise. This can
be calculated not only with model perplexity, but also when large distances are
required to connect the innovation or new venture description within the model’s
high-dimensional embedding space. This allows for a sophisticated understanding
of how disparate ideas or elements might coalesce to form innovative products,
services, and enterprises (Aceves and Evans, 2023).
The second challenge in entrepreneurship and innovation research concerns the
‘small data’ available for the study of origins. New data streams have significantly
expanded the reservoir of relevant data, but for novel enterprises and inventions,
detailed information remains scant. This presents a formidable obstacle for those
adhering to the text/images/networks-as-data approach. In contrast, LLMs offer a
powerful resolution. Once LLMs are pre-trained on wide-ranging contextual data,
such as seemingly unrelated text from Wikipedia and the web, they can infer
accurate relationships from even scant facets of a new venture or technology. For
instance, by processing a corpus of historical business press releases, transformers
could infer latent connections and precise distances between those companies with
no textual overlap in their descriptions, drawing on voluminous contemporary
business discourse from newspapers, magazines, and the web. This highlights the
‘foundation model’ aspects of LLMs, where when built from vast stores of available
language, they can effectively expand sparse data. In the context of a world of
discourse, even description data from Crunchbase on three new ventures alone is
enough to precisely identify the relative distance or proximity between them and
within the full matrix of societal concepts and cultural dimensions.
The third challenge in entrepreneurship and innovation that can be approached
with big data relates to complex synergies between technologies and their func-
tions in markets and society. Without being able to anticipate the functional
overlap or equivalence of technologies for specific business markets, then the cen-
tral process of entrepreneurship and innovation—creative destruction, whereby
improved technologies and businesses make their predecessors obsolete—cannot
be predicted or positively identified. LLMs can be made much more accurate for
context-sensitive measurements through two related processes. First, they can be
‘pre-trained’ with text data of special relevance to the context in question. In or-
der to predict the functional equivalent of a technology, LLMs can be pre-trained
on technology patents following their initial pre-training on large-scale text (e.g.,
a sample of the web). This might profitably include the ‘claims’ section in which
the patent’s inventor articulates the technology’s legally protected uses. Further-
more, LLMs can also be ‘fine tuned’ to predict other data that complement and
improve their performance on a focal task. In a small-scale analysis, we found that
integrating author collaboration networks with scientific textual embeddings sub-
stantially improved accuracy in predicting the technology performance compared
with text alone, as shown in figure 1. Yong-Yeol Ahn and colleagues (Lee et al.,
2024) fine-tuned a sentenceBERT LLM, which markedly improved their predic-
tion of new journals and new collaborations. Fine-tuning transformer models with
data from complementary systems can yield superior results that enable the kind
of precise functional equivalence required for anticipating technology replacement.
Fig. 1. The comparative r-squared values for linear model predictions of performance across
four categories of scientific projects (performance is measured by parameter number for ML/AI
models [ML]/ [AI], current density for semiconductors [SM], energy density for batteries [BA];
the two bars for each category contrast the predictive power of models using only semantic
embeddings against those enhanced with both semantic and author embedding information.
1.4. Big Data and the New Science of Entrepreneurship and Innovation
The business processes of innovation and entrepreneurship are deeply entwined.
On the one hand, new ventures represent a special instance of socio-technical
innovation. On the other, entrepreneurial firms catalyze social and technological
innovations that serve societal functions. In this chapter, we have reviewed novel
data streams relevant to entrepreneurship and innovation in the form of networks,
text, images, and audio that could enable us to deepen our understanding in
these fields. We have also reviewed two broad approaches through which they
can be harnessed for analysis: as data and as models. For researchers reliant on
traditional data forms and conventional linear or nonlinear models, the influx
of new data offers the chance to substantially increase sample sizes and feature
richness, improving both description and prediction. Despite this advantage, it
does not fully leverage the intrinsic value of these new data. The traditional data
approach compresses the granularity of semi- or unstructured data, reducing its
power to facilitate novel discovery or improve prediction.
Here we seek to demonstrate the comparable power of the model-based ap-
proach to big data as a superior approach method for many potential analyses
in the context of entrepreneurship and innovation research. This approach may
leverage the power of DNNs and contemporary transformers in order to intuitively
encode complex, unstructured data into high-dimensional embeddings, bypassing
the need for predefined features and low-dimensional representations. By build-
ing data-driven digital doubles of entrepreneurial and innovative phenomena, re-
searchers can construct innovation observatories to survey novel technologies and
new firms, yielding instantaneous, actionable insights. Furthermore, digital dou-
bles can also function as virtual labs, permitting simulation system responses to
new technologies and business ventures, explorations that might be untenable in
the wild. Specifically, for the study of entrepreneurship and innovation, genera-
tive models can enable the ‘hallucination’ or envisioning of new technologies, the
birth of novel firms, and the consequence of innovation investments. This forward-
thinking strategy does not simply chart the trajectory of what has been; but forges
counterfactuals for causal analysis, and paves the way for both a new science of en-
trepreneurship and innovation, and a method to accelerate successful investment,
venturing, and technology development (Rzhetsky et al., 2015).
References
Abbott, A., DeViney, S. (1992). The Welfare State as Transnational Event: Evidence from Se-
quences of Policy Adoption. Social Science History, 16(2), 245–274.
Aceves, P., Evans, J.A. (2023). Mobilizing Conceptual Spaces: How Word Embedding Models
Can Inform Measurement and Theory Within Organization Science. Organization Science,
35(3), 788–814. https://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.2023.1686.
Aghion, P., Howitt, P. (1990). A model of growth through creative destruction. National Bureau
of Economic Research Cambridge, Mass., USA.
Akcigit, U., Reenen, J.V. (Eds.) (2023). The Economics of Creative Destruction: New Re-
search on Themes from Aghion and Howitt. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.
9780674270367. https://www.hup.harvard.edu/catalog.php?isbn=9780674270367.
Alaql, A.A., AlQurashi, F., Mehmood, R. (2023). Data-Driven Deep Journalism to Dis-
cover Age Dynamics in Multi-Generational Labour Markets from LinkedIn Media. Jour-
nalism and Media, 4(1), 120–145. https://doi.org/10.3390/journalmedia4010010.
https://doi.org/10.3390/journalmedia4010010.
An, J., Kwak, H., Ahn, Y.-Y. (2018). SemAxis: A Lightweight Framework to Characterize
Domain-Specific Word Semantics Beyond Sentiment. In: Proceedings of the 56th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers). As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, pp. 2450–2461. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/
P18-1228. https://aclanthology.org/P18-1228.
Arseniev-Koehler, A., Cochran, S.D., Mays, V.M., Chang, K.-W., Foster, J.G. (2022). Integrating
Topic Modeling and Word Embedding to Characterize Violent Deaths. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 119(10), 2108801119. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.
2108801119. https://www.pnas.org/doi/10.1073/pnas.2108801119.
Beguš, G. (2021). CiwGAN and fiwGAN: Encoding information in acoustic data to model lexical
learning with Generative Adversarial Networks. Neural Networks, 139, 305–325.
Belikov, A.V., Rzhetsky, A., Evans, J. (2020). Detecting signal from science: The structure of
research communities and prior knowledge improves prediction of genetic regulatory experi-
ments. arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.09985.
Bellstam, G., Bhagat, S., Cookson, J.A. (2021). A text-based analysis of corporate innovation.
Management Science, 67(7), 4004–4031.
Borchert, P.S., Cardozo, R.N. (2010). Creative destruction and creative combination. Journal of
Applied Management and Entrepreneurship, 15(2), 64.
Bromham, L., Dinnage, R., Hua, X. (2016). Interdisciplinary research has consistently lower
funding success. Nature, 534(7609), 684–687.
Bu, J., Zhao, E.Y., Li, K.J., Li, J.M. (2022). Multilevel optimal distinctiveness: Examining
the impact of within-and between-organization distinctiveness of product design on market
performance. Strategic Management Journal, 43(9), 1793–1822.
Caballero, R.J. (2010). Creative destruction. In: Economic growth. Springer, pp. 24–29.
Campbell, D.W., Shang, R. (2022). Tone at the bottom: Measuring corporate misconduct risk
from the text of employee reviews. Management Science, 68(9), 7034–7053.
Cao, L., Chen, Z., Evans, J. (2022). Destructive creation, creative destruction, and the paradox
of innovation science. Sociology Compass, 16(11), 13043.
Cao, L., Chen, Z., Evans, J. (2023). Higher-Order Invention and New Venture Success. In:
Academy of Management Proceedings (Vol. 2023), p. 15455. Academy of Management Briar-
cliff Manor, NY 10510.
Chakraborty, T., Bhattacharyya, R., Das, N., Basu, S., Nasipuri, M. (2024). MAuD: a multivari-
ate audio database of samples collected from benchmark conferencing platforms. Multimedia
Tools and Applications, 83(13), 38465–38479.
Chandra, Y., Jiang, L.C., Wang, C.-J. (2016). Mining social entrepreneurship strategies using
topic modeling. PloS one, 11(3), 0151342.
Choudhury, P., Wang, D., Carlson, N.A., Khanna, T. (2019). Machine learning approaches to
facial and text analysis: Discovering CEO oral communication styles. Strategic Management
Journal, 40(11), 1705–1732.
Dai, D., Sun, Y., Dong, L., Hao, Y., Ma, S., Sui, Z., Wei, F. (2022). Why can gpt learn
in-context? language models implicitly perform gradient descent as meta-optimizers. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2212.10559.
Davis, G.F. (1991). Agents without principles? The spread of the poison pill through the inter-
corporate network. Administrative science quarterly, 583–613.
Domingos, P., VEVE, A. (2018). Our digital doubles. Scientific American, 319(3), 88–93.
Dowling, G. (2000). Creating corporate reputations: Identity, image and performance: Identity,
image and performance. OUP Oxford.
Dube, S., Zhu, C. (2021). The disciplinary effect of social media: Evidence from firms’ responses
to Glassdoor reviews. Journal of Accounting Research, 59(5), 1783–1825.
Dumais, S.T. (2004). Latent semantic analysis. Annual Review of Information Science and Tech-
nology (ARIST), 38, 189–230.
El-metwally, F.S., Eldesouky, A.I., Abdel-Hamid, N.B., Elghamrawy, S.M. (2023). Optimized
deep neural networks audio tagging framework for virtual business assistant. Journal of Ad-
vances in Information Technology, 14(3).
Ennis, P.H. (1961). Men Who Manage: Fusions of Feeling and Theory in Administration. JSTOR.
Evans, J. (2022). From Text Signals to Simulations: A Review and Complement to Text as
Data by Grimmer, Roberts & Stewart (PUP 2022). Sociological Methods & Research, 51(4),
1868–1885.
Evans, J.A., Aceves, P. (2016). Machine translation: Mining text for social theory. Annual review
of sociology, 42(1), 21–50.
Fan, X., Hansen, J.H. (2010). Speaker identification within whispered speech audio streams.
IEEE transactions on audio, speech, and language processing, 19(5), 1408–1421.
Fink, T., Reeves, M. (2019). How much can we influence the rate of innovation? Science advances,
5(1), 6107.
Fleming, L., Sorenson, O. (2001). Technology as a complex adaptive system: evidence from
patent data. Research policy, 30(7), 1019–1039.
Foster, J. (2010). Productivity, creative destruction and innovation policy: Some implications
from the Australian experience. Innovation, 12(3), 355–368.
Foster, J.G., Rzhetsky, A., Evans, J.A. (2015). Tradition and innovation in scientists’ research
strategies. American sociological review, 80(5), 875–908.
Gentzkow, M., Kelly, B., Taddy, M. (2019). Text as data. Journal of Economic Literature, 57(3),
535–574.
Giudici, P. (2005). Applied data mining: statistical methods for business and industry. John
Wiley & Sons.
Granovetter, M.S. (1973). The strength of weak ties. American journal of sociology, 78(6), 1360–
1380.
Grewal, R., Gupta, S., Hamilton, R. (2021). Marketing insights from multimedia data: Text,
image, audio, and video. SAGE Publications Sage CA: Los Angeles, CA.
Grimmer, J., Roberts, M.E., Stewart, B.M. (2022). Text as data: A new framework for machine
learning and the social sciences. Princeton University Press.
Guimera, R., Uzzi, B., Spiro, J., Amaral, L.A.N. (2005). Team assembly mechanisms determine
collaboration network structure and team performance. Science, 308(5722), 697–702.
Guzman, J., Li, A. (2023). Measuring founding strategy. Management Science, 69(1), 101–118.
Hain, D.S., Jurowetzki, R., Buchmann, T., Wolf, P. (2022). A text-embedding-based approach
to measuring patent-to-patent technological similarity. Technological Forecasting and Social
Change, 177, 121559.
Hasan, S., Koning, R. (2019). Conversations and idea generation: Evidence from a field experi-
ment. Research Policy, 48(9), 103811.
Heemskerk, E.M. (2013). The rise of the European corporate elite: evidence from the network
of interlocking directorates in 2005 and 2010. Economy and Society, 42(1), 74–101.
Hofstra, B., Kulkarni, V.V., Munoz-Najar Galvez, S., He, B., Jurafsky, D., McFarland, D.A.
(2020). The diversity–innovation paradox in science. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 117(17), 9284–9291.
Hua, G., Brown, M., Winder, S. (2007). Discriminant embedding for local image descriptors. In:
2007 IEEE 11th International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 1–8. IEEE.
Jo, J., Lee, C., Lee, D., Lim, H. (2018). An development of image retrieval model based on
Image2Vec using GAN. Journal of Digital Convergence, 16(12), 301–307.
Kaminski, J., Jiang, Y., Piller, F., Hopp, C. (2017). Do user entrepreneurs speak different?
Applying natural language processing to crowdfunding videos. In: Proceedings of the 2017
CHI conference extended abstracts on human factors in computing systems, pp. 2683–2689.
Kamiya, S., Kim, Y.H., Park, S. (2019). The face of risk: CEO facial masculinity and firm risk.
European Financial Management, 25(2), 239–270.
Karlsson, R., Krijthe, J. (2023). Detecting hidden confounding in observational data using mul-
tiple environments. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 44280–44309.
Koning, R. (2016). Field experiments in networks, innovation and entrepreneurship: Evidence
from a startup bootcamp. Stanford University.
Kozlowski, A.C., Taddy, M., Evans, J.A. (2019). The geometry of culture: Analyzing the mean-
ings of class through word embeddings. American Sociological Review, 84(5), 905–949.
Kumar, V., Rezaei, J., Akberdina, V., Kuzmin, E. (2021). Digital Transformation in Industry.
Springer.
Kwak, H., An, J., Ahn, Y.-Y. (2020). FrameAxis: characterizing framing bias and intensity with
word embedding.
Lee, B., Aiyappa, R., Ahn, Y.-Y., Kwak, H., An, J. (2024). Neural embedding of beliefs reveals
the role of relative dissonance in human decision-making. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.07237.
Li, S., Hu, J., Cui, Y., Hu, J. (2018). DeepPatent: patent classification with convolutional neural
networks and word embedding. Scientometrics, 117(2), 721–744.
Li, X., Su, J., Zhang, Z., Bai, R. (2021). Product innovation concept generation based on deep
learning and Kansei engineering. Journal of Engineering Design, 32(10), 559–589.
Ludwig, J., Mullainathan, S. (2022). Algorithmic behavioral science: Machine learning as a tool
for scientific discovery. Chicago Booth Research Paper.
Markowitz, D.M., Kouchaki, M., Gino, F., Hancock, J.T., Boyd, R.L. (2023). Authentic first
impressions relate to interpersonal, social, and entrepreneurial success. Social Psychological
and Personality Science, 14(2), 107–116.
Martinec, R., Salway, A. (2005). A system for image–text relations in new (and old) media.
Visual communication, 4(3), 337–371.
Mauney, B.S., Walker, B.N. (2004). Creating Functional and Livable Soundscapes for Peripheral
Monitoring of Dynamic Data. In: ICAD.
McDonald, R.M., Eisenhardt, K.M. (2020). Parallel play: Startups, nascent markets, and effective
business-model design. Administrative Science Quarterly, 65(2), 483–523.
McNerney, J. (2009). Network properties of economic input-output networks.
Merton, R.K. (1957). Priorities in scientific discovery: A chapter in the sociology of science.
American sociological review, 22(6), 635–659.
Miikkulainen, R., Liang, J., Meyerson, E., Rawal, A., Fink, D., Francon, O., Raju, B., Shahrzad,
H., Navruzyan, A., Duffy, N., et al.(2024). Evolving deep neural networks. In: Artificial in-
telligence in the age of neural networks and brain computing. Elsevier, pp. 269–287.
Mikolov, T., Sutskever, I., Chen, K., Corrado, G.S., Dean, J. (2013). Distributed representations
of words and phrases and their compositionality. Advances in neural information processing
systems, 26.
Mizruchi, M.S. (1993). Cohesion, equivalence, and similarity of behavior: A theoretical and
empirical assessment. Social networks, 15(3), 275–307.
Mulyono, I.U.W., Susanto, A., Rachmawanto, E.H., Fahmi, A., et al.(2019). Performance analysis
of face recognition using eigenface approach. In: 2019 International Seminar on Application
for Technology of Information and Communication (iSemantic), pp. 1–5. IEEE.
Nguyen, Q.T., Naguib, R.N., Loo, M. (2021). Towards Emotional Intelligence: Analysis of Static
Facial Features in LinkedIn Profile Pictures. In: 2021 International Conference on Computa-
tional Performance Evaluation (ComPE), pp. 399–403. IEEE.
Osgood, C.E., Suci, G.J., Tannenbaum, P.H. (1957). The measurement of meaning (Vol. 47).
University of Illinois press.
Owen-Smith, J., Powell, W. (2008). Networks and Institutions. The Sage Handbook of Organi-
zational Institutionalism. https://doi.org/10.4135/9781849200387.n26.
Park, M., Leahey, E., Funk, R.J. (2023). Papers and patents are becoming less disruptive over
time. Nature, 613(7942), 138–144.
Pennebaker, J.W., Lay, T.C. (2002). Language use and personality during crises: Analyses of
Mayor Rudolph Giuliani’s press conferences. Journal of Research in Personality, 36(3), 271–
282.
Pennings, J.M., Harianto, F. (1992). Technological networking and innovation implementation.
Organization Science, 3(3), 356–382.
Podolny, J.M. (1997). Is it Better to Have Status Or to Know what You are Doing?: An Ex-
amination of Position Capability in Venture Capital Markets (Vol. 1455). Graduate School
of Business, Stanford University.
Podolny, J.M., Castellucci, F. (1999). Choosing ties from the inside of a prism: Egocentric
uncertainty and status in venture capital markets. In: Corporate social capital and liability.
Springer, pp. 431–445.
Purdy, M. (2023). Sound business: the promise of audio machine learning technologies. MIT
Sloan Management Review, 65(1), 1–3.
Rao, A., Ahuja, A., Kansara, S., Patel, V. (2021). Sentiment analysis on user-generated video,
audio and text. In: 2021 International Conference on Computing, Communication, and In-
telligent Systems (ICCCIS), pp. 24–28. IEEE.
Ries, E. (2011). The lean startup: How today’s entrepreneurs use continuous innovation to create
radically successful businesses. Crown Currency.
Rodero, E. (2020). Do your ads talk too fast to your audio audience? How speech rates of audio
commercials influence cognitive and physiological outcomes. Journal of Advertising Research,
60(3), 337–349.
Roundy, P.T., Asllani, A. (2019). Understanding the language of entrepreneurship: An ex-
ploratory analysis of entrepreneurial discourse. Journal of Economic and Administrative Sci-
ences, 35(2), 113–127.
Rzhetsky, A., Foster, J.G., Foster, I.T., Evans, J.A. (2015). Choosing experiments to accelerate
collective discovery. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 112(47), 14569–14574.
Schumpeter, J.A. (2013). Capitalism, socialism and democracy. routledge.
Senior, A.W., Evans, R., Jumper, J., Kirkpatrick, J., Sifre, L., Green, T., Qin, C., Žídek, A., Nel-
son, A.W., Bridgland, A., et al.(2020). Improved protein structure prediction using potentials
from deep learning. Nature, 577(7792), 706–710.
Shi, F., Evans, J. (2023). Surprising combinations of research contents and contexts are related to
impact and emerge with scientific outsiders from distant disciplines. Nature Communications,
14(1), 1641.
Shi, F., Foster, J.G., Evans, J.A. (2015). Weaving the fabric of science: Dynamic network models
of science’s unfolding structure. Social Networks, 43, 73–85.
Silver, D., Childress, C., Lee, M., Slez, A., Dias, F. (2022). Balancing categorical conventionality
in music. American Journal of Sociology, 128(1), 224–286.
Singh, S., Singh, S., Dhir, S. (2023). The evolving relationship of entrepreneurship, technology,
and innovation: A topic modeling perspective. The International Journal of Entrepreneurship
and Innovation, 14657503231179597.
Sourati, J., Evans, J.A. (2023). Accelerating science with human-aware artificial intelligence.
Nature human behaviour, 7(10), 1682–1696.
Stigler, S.M. (1980). Stigler’s law of eponymy. Transactions of the New York academy of sciences,
39(1 Series II), 147–157.
Stinchcombe, A.L. (2013). Social structure and organizations. In: Handbook of organizations
(RLE: Organizations). Routledge, pp. 142–193.
Suárez, J.L., White, R.E., Parker, S.C., Jiménez-Mavillard, A. (2021). Entrepreneurship bias
and the mass media: Evidence from big data. Academy of Management Discoveries, 7(2),
247–265.
Taeuscher, K., Zhao, E.Y., Lounsbury, M. (2022). Categories and narratives as sources of dis-
tinctiveness: Cultural entrepreneurship within and across categories. Strategic Management
Journal, 43(10), 2101–2134.
Thompson, P., Fox-Kean, M. (2005). Patent citations and the geography of knowledge spillovers:
A reassessment. American Economic Review, 95(1), 450–460.
Tshitoyan, V., Dagdelen, J., Weston, L., Dunn, A., Rong, Z., Kononova, O., Persson, K.A.,
Ceder, G., Jain, A. (2019). Unsupervised word embeddings capture latent knowledge from
materials science literature. Nature, 571(7763), 95–98.
Turing, A.M. (2009). Computing machinery and intelligence. Springer.
Uzzi, B., Mukherjee, S., Stringer, M., Jones, B. (2013). Atypical combinations and scientific
impact. Science, 342(6157), 468–472.
Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A.N., Kaiser, Ł., Polo-
sukhin, I. (2017). Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information processing sys-
tems, 30.
Veitch, V., Sridhar, D., Blei, D.M. (2019). Using Text Embeddings for Causal Inference. CoRR,
abs/1905.12741. http://arxiv.org/abs/1905.12741.
Vicinanza, P., Goldberg, A., Srivastava, S.B. (2023). A deep-learning model of prescient ideas
demonstrates that they emerge from the periphery. PNAS nexus, 2(1), 275.
Von Oswald, J., Niklasson, E., Randazzo, E., Sacramento, J., Mordvintsev, A., Zhmoginov, A.,
Vladymyrov, M. (2023). Transformers learn in-context by gradient descent. In: International
Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 35151–35174. PMLR.
Wang, J., Veugelers, R., Stephan, P. (2017). Bias against novelty in science: A cautionary tale
for users of bibliometric indicators. Research Policy, 46(8), 1416–1436.
Werth, J.C., Boeert, P. (2013). Co-investment networks of business angels and the performance
of their start-up investments. International Journal of Entrepreneurial Venturing 1, 5(3),
240–256.
Woodruff, C., Zenteno, R. (2007). Migration networks and microenterprises in Mexico. Journal
of development economics, 82(2), 509–528.
Wright, N.L., Koning, R., Khanna, T. (2023). Judging foreign startups. Strategic Management
Journal, 44(9), 2195–2225.
Zha, Y., Zhou, T., Zhou, C. (2016). Unfolding large-scale online collaborative human dynamics.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 113(51), 14627–14632.
Zhang, L., Guler, I. (2020). How to join the club: Patterns of embeddedness and the addition of
new members to interorganizational collaborations. Administrative Science Quarterly, 65(1),
112–150.
